

Sackmann2006 - mating pheromone response pathway of S.cerevisiae

This model is described in the article:

[Application of Petri net based analysis techniques to signal transduction
pathways](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/17081284)

Sackmann A, Heiner M, Koch I.

BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Nov 2;7:482.

Abstract:

BACKGROUND: Signal transduction pathways are usually modelled using classical
quantitative methods, which are based on ordinary differential equations
(ODEs). However, some difficulties are inherent in this approach. On the one
hand, the kinetic parameters involved are often unknown and have to be
estimated. With increasing size and complexity of signal transduction
pathways, the estimation of missing kinetic data is not possible. On the other
hand, ODEs based models do not support any explicit insights into possible
(signal-) flows within the network. Moreover, a huge amount of qualitative
data is available due to high-throughput techniques. In order to get
information on the systems behaviour, qualitative analysis techniques have
been developed. Applications of the known qualitative analysis methods concern
mainly metabolic networks. Petri net theory provides a variety of established
analysis techniques, which are also applicable to signal transduction models.
In this context special properties have to be considered and new dedicated
techniques have to be designed.

METHODS:We apply Petri net theory to model and analyse signal transduction
pathways first qualitatively before continuing with quantitative analyses.
This paper demonstrates how to build systematically a discrete model, which
reflects provably the qualitative biological behaviour without any knowledge
of kinetic parameters. The mating pheromone response pathway in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae serves as case study.

RESULTS:We propose an approach for model validation of signal transduction
pathways based on the network structure only. For this purpose, we introduce
the new notion of feasible t-invariants, which represent minimal self-
contained subnets being active under a given input situation. Each of these
subnets stands for a signal flow in the system. We define maximal common
transition sets (MCT-sets), which can be used for t-invariant examination and
net decomposition into smallest biologically meaningful functional units.

CONCLUSION:The paper demonstrates how Petri net analysis techniques can
promote a deeper understanding of signal transduction pathways. The new
concepts of feasible t-invariants and MCT-sets have been proven to be useful
for model validation and the interpretation of the biological system
behaviour. Whereas MCT-sets provide a decomposition of the net into
disjunctive subnets, feasible t-invariants describe subnets, which generally
overlap. This work contributes to qualitative modelling and to the analysis of
large biological networks by their fully automatic decomposition into
biologically meaningful modules.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1403040000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1403040000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

